---
layout: post
title: Complicated relationship between race and medicine by Elaine Huang
---
<!--excerpt-->

Race is often used as a rough proxy for inferring genomic variation that
may affect drug response. Though several studies note that self-identified
race correlates with geographical ancestry (which is a determinant of
genomic variations that can affect drug reaction--e.g. 10% of people=
 have a
mutation in CYP2D6 that makes the pain medication codeine nearly/completely
ineffective), there are some dangers to this practice. Not only does it
potentially reinforce the view that there are biological differences
underlying social definitions of race (which can be used to motivate racial
discrimination), but it also may cause doctors to overlook potentially
helpful drug treatments for individual patients. For example, due to
frequent reports (e.g. [Exner et al. 2001](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11333991/)) that ACE inhibitors are less
effective in black patients, physicians are less likely to prescribe them
to these individuals. This may prevent individual patients whose
hypertension would have responded well to ACE inhibitors from receiving
them. Subsequent studies have shown that when adequate dosing and
appropriate combinations are used, ACE inhibitors are equally effective in
both black and white patients ([Saunders and Gavin 2003](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12556668/)).
Furthermore, self-identified race does not always correlate with ancestry
as well as we'd expect. in one report, while individuals who self-r=
eported
as white had on average less than 10% African ancestry; those who
self-reported as black had a much wider variance in background--a
significant number of individuals had less than 10% African ancestry ([TED
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=3D1&v=3DLAWrwexw-To&feature=3D=
emb_logo),
mentions study from NEJM around 7:50). Precision/personalized medicine,
which involves using personal data (e.g. environment, lifestyle, and
genomic variation) to prescribe treatments could reduce the use of
self-reported race in drug prescribing, but there are challenges that must
be overcome before it can be implemented/accessible widely. One of these
challenges involves recruiting more diverse cohorts for studies on how
genetic makeup impacts drug response--and with our current lack of knowledge
about what exactly the relevant variants to look for are, we may have to
use self-reported race as a proxy for defining diversity (even though using
it as a variable is something we're trying to reduce in drug prescr=
ibing)
(this last sentence is how I'm interpreting the conclusion of Bonha=
m et
al.).

