---
layout: post
title: The early days of eugenics by Tommer Schwarz
---
<!--excerpt-->

As was pointed out in our previous newsletter, Francis Galton is largely credited for the founding of behavioral genetics research. However, Galton is probably more well known for coining the term “eugenics” in the late 1800’s, and being one of its first supporters. Galton wrote that … “What nature does blindly, slowly, and ruthlessly; man may do providently, quickly, and kindly. As it lies within his power, so it becomes his duty to work in that direction,”


In 1912, the first International Conference on Eugenics was hosted in London, attended by Winston Churchill, Alexander Graham Bell, Charles Eliot (president of Harvard at the time), and many other figures from a variety of disciplines. There were two presentations that were good indicators of what state eugenics was at, and where it was heading. The first was given by a German physician named Alfred Ploetz, who spoke about “race-hygiene” and launching a racial-cleansing effort in Germany. And something to note here -- this is 20 years before the start of WW2. But at that point, Ploetz was presenting his endorsement for the Germans’ plans for the future.


This stands in contrast to the second presentation, which put forth concrete plans of how to put eugenics into practice. Bleecke Van Wagenen, the president of the American Breeders’ Association, spoke about what efforts to eliminate “defective strains” in the United States would actually look like. He would go on to make some appalling statements, saying that “... Nearly ten percent of the total population are of inferior blood … they are totally unfitted to become the parents of useful citizens… in eight of the states of the union, there are laws authorizing or requiring sterilization…. Pennsylvania, Kansas, Idaho, Virginia … there have been sterilized a considerable number of individuals …”


In the 1920’s, a landmark case in eugenics reached the United States Supreme Court. The case involved Emma Buck , who had been sent to the Virginia State Colony for Epileptics and Feebleminded after rumors surfaced that she had had sex for money. Her daughter, Carrie Buck, was abused by her foster parents, eventually receiving a diagnosis of “feeblemindedness”, and in 1924, was sent to the Virginia State Colony, as well. That year, the commonwealth of Virginia passed a law authorizing the forced sterilization of “intellectually disabled” individuals, for the purpose of eugenics. To test how this law would hold up in practice, the superintendent of the Virginia State Colony filed a petition to sterilize Carrie Buck.


In 1927, after several rulings against Buck and several appeals, the case reached the United States Supreme Court, Buck v Bell. In an 8-1 decision, the court ruled that Virginia’s sterilization laws were legitimate, and that it was in the state’s best interest to have Buck sterilized. The ruling, written by judge Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., who was considered to be one of the nation’s most vocal advocates of judicial moderation, wrote that “... three generations of imbeciles is enough,” Buck was sterilized on October 19, 1927. 



Information and quotes from this writeup are taken from:

“The Gene: An intimate history” by Siddhartha Mukherjee

The ruling for Buck v Bell, which can be found here: https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=1700304772805702914

Buck v. Bell (1927) - http://www.encyclopediavirginia.org/Buck_v_Bell_1927
